# PFAS-immunotoxicity-invitro
PBMCs from human donors exposused to varying concentrations of PFOS, PFOA, PFNA,PFDA, PFHxS, and GenX followied by exposure to LPS or PHA. 
PBMC maintenance
Purified PBMCs from 8 healthy adult donors (4 males and 4 females) were sourced from a commercial supplier (Miltenyi Biotec, USA, cat#150-000-572). Along with the PBMCs, corresponding plasma samples were also provided for baseline PFAS analysis. Upon arrival, PBMCs were aliquoted in 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Millipore Sigma, cat#472301) and 90% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher, cat#A5256701) and stored at -80°C for future analysis. Corresponding plasma samples were also stored at -80°C for future analysis.
For analysis cryopreserved human PBMCs were rapidly thawed in a 37°C water bath and resuspended in FBS. 5000 U/mL Micrococcal Nuclease (Thermo Fisher, cat#EN0181) was added for 20s followed by 5 mL of FBS. The cells were then resuspended in fresh RPMI 1640 medium (Thermo Fisher, cat#11875093) supplemented with and 10% heat-inactivated FBS, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher, cat#15140122). Cell number and viability was assessed using trypan blue. 
CFSE (Carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester) staining 
After thawing, cells were resuspended in 1 µM CFSE (Thermo Fisher, cat#C34554) solution and incubated for 20 min at 37°C. Following staining, cells were resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium and seeded in a 96-well plate at a density of 1×106 cells/mL and left to rest overnight at 37°C.
Chemical treatment
All test chemicals were obtained in powder form, with the exception of PFOS (Millipore Sigma, cat#33607), and were prepared as concentrated stock solutions in their respective solvents. Stock solutions were prepared by dissolving each chemical in either methanol (Thermo Fisher, cat#A456-4) or DMSO, depending on the solubility of the compound. For GenX (Toronto Research Chemicals, cat#A634960) methanol was used as the solvent due to its instability in DMSO (Liberatore et al., 2020), while PFOA (Millipore Sigma, cat#171468), PFOS (Millipore Sigma, cat#77283), PFNA (Millipore Sigma, cat#394459), PFDA (Millipore Sigma, cat#177741), and PFHxS (Toronto Research Chemicals, cat#P999738) were dissolved in DMSO. To prepare stock solutions, the required amount of each chemical was weighed and dissolved in the appropriate solvent to achieve a stock concentration of 50 mM. A 1:1.5 dilution of the 50 mM stock in culture medium was freshly prepared to yield a 20 mM working solution, which was further diluted 1:200 in the wells to obtain a final concentration of 100 μM. Subsequent concentrations were prepared through serial dilutions using a mixture of 60% culture medium and 40% DMSO.
Human PBMCs and mouse splenocytes were exposed to varying concentrations of PFOS, PFNA, PFDA, PFHxS, and GenX for 24 h or 96 h. Appropriate vehicle controls were included for each assay. For the 0 μM conditions, cells were exposed to an equal volume of the diluent (v/v). The DMSO or methanol concentration in the culture did not exceed 0.2%.
After 24 1X lipopolysaccharide (LPS, Thermo Fisher, cat#00-4976-93) or 1X phytohemagglutinin-L (PHA, Thermo Fisher, cat#00-4977-03). 24 h following induction via the a portion of the supernatant was isolation for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). The remaining cells were exposed for a total a 96 h and used for flow cytometry analysis.
Flow cytometry 
	Single cell suspensions were stained with LIVE/DEAD fixable aqua dead cell stain in PBS (1:1000, ThermoFisher, cat# L34957) to exclude dead cells and debris, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. To block non-specific binding of antibodies by Fc receptors, prior to staining for surface antigens cell were incubated with Mouse BD Fc Block (1:100, BD, cat#553141 ). Suspensions were then incubated with antibodies CD3 Monoclonal Antibody, APC (ThermoFisher cat#17-0037-42), CD4 Monoclonal Antibody, eFluor™ 450 (ThermoFisher cat#48-0049-42), and IFN gamma Monoclonal Antibody, PE (ThermoFisher cat#12-7319-42) in flow cytometry Stain Buffer (BD Biosciences, cat#554715). Flow cytometric analysis was performed using the LSRFortessa Cell Analyzer (BD Biosciences) running FACSDiva acquisition software , and data analyzed using FlowJo v10.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbentassays (ELISAs)
Human IFN-gamma DuoSet ELISA (Bio-Techne, cat#DY285B) and Human TNF-alpha DuoSet ELISA (Bio-Techne, cat#DY210) were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For cytokine analysis PBMC supernatant isolated 24 h post PFAS exposure were diluted 1:2 in reagent dilutent.
